When you hear a medical term
that ends in “itis”
it means something is inflamed.
Tracheobronchitis is inflammation of the trachea
your main airway — and bronchi
the smaller branching airways going into your lungs.
There are many airborne organisms, such as viruses,
that can cause infection
and inflammation of the trachea and bronchi.
If you breathe in virus particles
that are floating in the air,
they can bind to hair-like structures on the
surface of cells lining the airways.
They can then enter the cells
and begin to multiply.
Eventually the cells they have invaded
die and redness and inflammation develop.
As your immune system tries to
fight the inflammation and infection,
the lining of the bronchi swell
and more mucus is produced.
Less air is able to flow
to and from the lungs,
and mucus can accumulate in your airways.
This can result in a cough with green sputum,
as your body tries to clear the accumulated mucus,
as well as soreness in the chest,
and sometimes mild shortness of breath.